[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
For those of you
who have not seen part one of my
conversation with Jack Barsky,
please hit pause and
go back and watch it.
If you have, we're going to
pick up the story at the point
where Jack has passed all
of the necessary training
to become a top notch Soviet
spy embedded illegally
in the United States.
We also have joining
us a little bit later
Jack's daughter Chelsea.
Chelsea was 19
years old when she
learned that her American dad,
Jack Barsky, was a Soviet spy.
Jack, welcome back.
I love it.
>>JACK BARSKY: Good to be back.
>>REGINA: I'm sure
everybody is totally
hanging on pins and needles to
find out what happened next.
So let's just go right for it.
We don't need to recap.
Everyone can go watch it.
So we're picking up now.
Now it's time to
do the trial run
to become an American,
which is to Canada.
>>BARSKY: Right.
>>REGINA: So.
Now, meanwhile, I think
we need to explain.
You've already gone
through a couple name
changes and everything
during this journey.
And you go through very
circuitous routes of passports
to one country, swap
them out, burn them.
Get another set of passports
in another country.
Boom.
You end up in Canada.
You're starting to observe kind
of the customs of the American
or the Western way of life.
Share a little of that.
And then what happened-- which I
teased everyone with at the end
of the last show--
when it came time to have
a beer with some people
and you had never encountered
a twist-off and the terror
that ensued.
>>BARSKY: Right.
Right.
So you know, I'm sitting
in a restaurant and--
eat some food.
And the beer was
served in bottles.
Which was unusual--
normally, you know,
you would expect a glass.
But it's OK.
So then I asked the waiter
to get me a bottle opener.
And he asked me why.
And I says, well, I
want to open the bottle.
And he looked at me
with a grin, and he
thought-- he thought I was
probably trying to tease me.
He, with a grin took, the
bottle and then just did this.
That was a revelation.
We didn't have those.
>>REGINA: But the thing
was you felt busted.
>>BARSKY: But I betrayed
my cultural ignorance,
and that was no good.
It was an in my face,
hey, be careful.
You don't know a lot
of details that you
need to know if you pretend
to have been born and raised
in the United States.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And that was-- again,
what was interesting is
the amount of detail that
you would never think of.
As a tourist going
to another country,
they expect you to be ignorant.
You're ignorant.
You learn along the way.
>>BARSKY: Right.
>>REGINA: You have
to show, you have
to show up as a complete package
that already knows everything
about the customs.
>>BARSKY: Right.
Now, I was in Canada
on a German passport.
It was OK for everybody else
to understand that maybe I
didn't know everything thing.
>>REGINA: But not you.
>>BARSKY: But I was in
training to become an American.
And therefore, it was
a big negative for me.
>>REGINA: Right.
So Canada passes.
What did you learn
through that part
before you went
back and then made
the big entry into America.
>>BARSKY: Well, I
learned two things that--
North America was extremely
rich in terms of overall wealth.
And people were
all very friendly.
So it wasn't like--
you know, you
didn't feel like you
were in enemy territory.
So I was actually
looking forward
to going to the United
States because I
felt like I can operate there.
Nice people now.
>>REGINA: However, you went to
New York City, as it turns out.
I mean, it's nice.
It's nice.
It's nicer now than it
was back then, actually.
OK.
So you go back.
Now is the big entree.
And you're going to
be basically dropped.
You're out of view.
You have your ways of
communicating with the Center,
but you're on your own.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, dropped-- you
can make that case.
But it was a long, zigzag
path through a number
of countries using a number
of different identities
to make sure that my
presence in the US
would not possibly,
could not possibly
be traced back to Moscow.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: And then I
truly was on my own.
There was not ever one
meeting with somebody
from the Center on the
territory of the United States.
>>REGINA: So you were going
to be embedded as an illegal.
Which is, for the
romantic version of it,
people who've watched
the show "The Americans,"
they were embedded
as illegals that
were controlled by the Center.
And we're going to talk
about a little bit of those,
the fantasy part versus the
parts that had some substance.
But when you first
arrived here, first you
had to go through customs.
And that was very nerve
wracking for you just
to go through
immigration, right?
>>BARSKY: That was the most
tense moment in my entire life,
even though rationally,
I had nothing to fear.
I was traveling on
a very well-crafted
false Canadian passport.
So what?
But I still-- you know, I was
entering the United States.
And I was thinking
maybe I had KGB--
>>REGINA: Well, yeah.
You know what you're there for.
>>BARSKY: --in big
letters on my forehead.
Exactly.
And I was afraid of sort of
just making one dumb mistake
and giving away that
I may be somebody
who should be questioned
a little more in detail.
Look, my luggage
didn't have much in it,
and it had a shortwave radio.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: That could have
triggered some interrogation.
>>REGINA: But you
did get through.
They gave you $7,000, right?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>BARSKY: Well, at the
time I entered the US,
I had about $7,000 left.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
You had $7,000 and
you had, essentially,
a birth certificate of a
deceased young boy named
Jack Barsky.
>>BARSKY: Correct.
That is correct.
>>REGINA: And they said your
job is now to become legal,
to obtain all the
identification.
>>BARSKY: Right.
>>REGINA: Which, you know,
as an American, you think,
oh, well, you go down and apply.
Not so for someone
who's not an American.
And so just the
journey of getting
settled, finding
a little apartment
somewhere, on
limited funds, having
to find a job with no ID.
>>BARSKY: With no track
record of prior employment.
>>REGINA: Nothing.
>>BARSKY: No marketable skills.
>>REGINA: No marketable skills.
>>BARSKY: And my chemistry
past I couldn't take with me.
>>REGINA: You couldn't take
your illustrious past with you.
>>BARSKY: Nope.
>>REGINA: Which, you would
have been a tenured professor
by that point, or on
your way to tenure--
>>BARSKY: That's right.
>>REGINA: --you know, in Europe.
So you ended up getting a job as
a messenger, bicycle messenger
boy in New York
City, rushing around
in rain and snow and sleet
and hail and sunshine.
And let's talk about the
journey of getting your ID.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
So this was all very well
planned by the Center,
but they didn't know
what they didn't know.
And they had no idea
that the very first step
was the most difficult one.
Well, you know what?
You just get a library card.
And with a birth certificate
and a library card,
you can now get a
driver's license.
Easy.
>>REGINA: Anyone can
get a library card.
>>BARSKY: One, two, three.
Well, guess what?
At the library, at the public
library, they asked me for ID.
So this was a catch-22.
And so, you know what,
it took me a while.
First of all, I communicated
to the Center, to Moscow.
I says, I'm having
a problem here.
Can you give me some advice?
Nothing.
Try to figure it out.
And that's one of the reasons
that they hired people like me.
>>REGINA: Because they
figured you can figure it out.
>>BARSKY: We are
figuring things out.
And one day-- and I
did a lot of research.
You know, you could
go to the library
and read books and stuff.
That was not a problem.
You just couldn't get a card.
So I did a lot of reading,
I looked at newspapers.
I was trying to figure out,
how do I get some kind of an ID
that allows me to
get a library card?
And one day I was in the
Museum of Natural History,
and they were
advertising memberships.
And I saw they had
little plastic cards that
would have your name
on it and your address.
Ooh.
So I paid like, what, $40
for an annual membership.
I got my little ID, I went to
the public library in Brooklyn.
And when they asked
for ID, I said--
and they accepted it.
[WHISTLES] Now I
had my library card,
which was a requirement to
get a driver's license for--
the driver's license
was a piece of cake.
I just had to learn how to
parallel park in New York.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: And then--
>>REGINA: Then the next
big one, social security.
>>BARSKY: That was
a big one simply
because I had--
this one, you had
to be interviewed in person.
You couldn't get it
through the mail, right?
That was a requirement.
And that was probably, outside
of entering the United States,
the second most scary moment.
>>REGINA: Well, the
background on it is great.
You really prepped, get
everything-- you know,
god is in the details.
But you didn't believe
in God, per se, right?
And so when you prepped for
the social security card,
I just said, oh my god.
You found out there
were two exemptions.
>>BARSKY: Correct.
>>REGINA: Because they're
like, hey, you're old.
Why don't you have a social
security card, right?
>>BARSKY: Right.
And in those days,
folks who were employed
by religious
organizations, churches,
were not subject to the
social security law.
And farm workers.
So my back story, we had me
on a farm for several years.
>>REGINA: And you did the work.
>>BARSKY: So I had to
now impersonate, like,
somebody who had just
jumped off the potato truck.
I didn't shave for
a couple of days.
I went out in the park and
put a little dirt on my face.
I rubbed--
>>REGINA: Your nails?
You rubbed it under your nails.
>>BARSKY: Yes, on my nails.
I rubbed soap into my
eyes so they'd get red.
So I just, like,
dumbed myself down.
And I practiced
answers to questions.
And I made them all mono--
>>REGINA: Monosyllabic.
I mean it was crazy.
>>BARSKY: --monosyllabic.
Yes, no.
>>REGINA: You did a great job.
>>BARSKY: Very short sentences.
Like, you know, uh.
And I did a pretty good
job playing a dumb idiot.
>>REGINA: Well, and they said,
why don't you already have one?
>>BARSKY: I said I--
>>REGINA: Didn't
know I needed it.
>>BARSKY: --didn't need one.
>>REGINA: Didn't need one.
>>BARSKY: Oh, well.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: That was the
truth as they knew it.
So, and the interview
was very short.
You know, fill out
this, and we're done.
Whew.
>>REGINA: So you got your card.
>>BARSKY: That was brilliant.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that was brilliant.
But then comes the big
one, the holy grail.
The passport.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, the big one.
This was the plan, the big plan.
And you know, in hindsight, I'm
very glad that the plan didn't
work out.
Because I would have been a
very dangerous undercover agent.
The plan was to get
an American passport
and now be a bona fide American
no matter where you are.
And go back to Europe, let's
say, Switzerland or Austria,
where the KGB was going to
set me up with a company.
And they had very, very
good experience doing that.
And then funnel a bunch
of funds into the company,
and within a year or two, I
would be a multimillionaire,
come back to the United
States, repatriate the money,
and pretty much get accepted
to many a country club.
This is where I was
supposed to meet the people.
>>REGINA: You were supposed
to be groomed for that.
Now, why do you say--
first, before we
go to what happened, why do you
say you would have been a very
dangerous undercover agent?
>>BARSKY: Because I knew
I had the skills to,
and the knowledge, to mingle
with highly educated people.
>>REGINA: But that was the idea.
>>BARSKY: And this would have
given me an entrance to just,
like, be naturally
in an environment
where you would meet
people who either were
decision makers or
at least influencers
or close to decision makers.
We're talking about I
was supposed to find--
>>REGINA: Zbigniew Brzezinski
was a real target, right?
>>BARSKY: He was mentioned
as a target among others.
Conservative think tanks.
Anybody who had some influence
on government policy.
I was supposed to--
fundamentally, I was trained
to do political intelligence.
And I would have been
dangerous in that way.
>>REGINA: Dangerous too whom?
>>BARSKY: Dangerous
to the United States.
>>REGINA: Not to
yourself or to the KGB.
>>BARSKY: No, no, no.
>>REGINA: Dangerous to the US.
>>BARSKY: That is correct.
You know, I would have
been in a position
to actually find
out intelligence,
possibly at the highest level.
>>REGINA: Did they have other
people positioned there?
>>BARSKY: I don't know.
>>REGINA: Yeah, because you
wouldn't know of each other.
>>BARSKY: I know only one other
person who was trained like me
and sent to the United States.
And his only task
was to live here.
He was a sleeper, period.
I was a sleeper,
and I was supposed
to gather intelligence.
>>REGINA: OK.
So now let's go back
to the application
for the passport, which would
have allowed all of that.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
We practiced filling
out the form in Moscow.
And so I knew exactly--
they told me to go to the
passport agency in person,
not to do it in the mail.
That was a bad mistake.
And I made a mistake myself.
I didn't think it through.
I followed the instructions.
So there were a couple of
questions that were like--
>>REGINA: One was about
your high school, something
about your high school.
>>BARSKY: No, no, no, no.
No, it started out-- on
the questionnaire it says,
what is your profession?
And I wrote the
truth-- bike messenger.
I should have written
independent contractor,
because that was the truth.
I was an independent contractor.
All right?
Number one.
Number two, and two questions
that were discretionary.
Where are you going, and when
are you planning to go there?
I left them blank.
So now we have a messenger--
>>REGINA: Messenger boy.
>>BARSKY: --who doesn't
make a lot of money,
who doesn't know where he's
going and where he's going.
Hello?
What does he need
the passport for?
And so that triggered the agent.
This is what he said--
we have some questions
about your identity.
Oh.
Please fill out a
separate questionnaire
so we can validate.
I took that piece of paper.
I went over to the side where
there were some spots where you
can write sit down and write.
The very first question
blew up the whole thing
and I knew this.
I didn't even read
anything afterwards.
Where did you go to high school?
>>REGINA: They didn't train you.
You didn't get you back
story straightened out.
>>BARSKY: My back story had me
go to a high school in New York
City, but--
>>REGINA: They didn't
give your names.
>>BARSKY: I wasn't there.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: I wasn't-- they
could called them up,
did that guy ever
go to, know you--
I couldn't answer that question.
So I knew at that point I
had only one way to get out
of there in one piece--
to grab whatever I
could grab so there
was no trace of me being there.
And he had my application still
sitting there on his desk.
So I just went there
and I pretended
to be really angry
like, [BUMBLING]..
>>REGINA: Righteous indignation.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
Why are you making me jump
through all these hoops?
I don't need this--
>>REGINA: B.S.
>>BARSKY: --fill the blanks.
And I grabbed the stuff
and walked out of there.
And I--
>>REGINA: Your heart must
have been about to explode.
>>BARSKY: I expected
that security
would come running after me.
No.
And so they never knew that Jack
Barsky applied for a passport
and that he probably
has a shady background.
>>REGINA: OK.
All right.
So now you're here,
you're doing your job.
At what point did you end up
getting a job with MetLife?
And let's talk-- go through
the bicycle messenger
phase of your life until
you got a real job.
>>BARSKY: That was
actually pretty lucky
that I got into this job.
Because I learned to be an
American by observing people
who didn't really--
who weren't really
curious about anybody else.
They were just there, right?
>>REGINA: They weren't nosy.
>>BARSKY: They weren't nosy.
And there was a lot
of transients that
came in and out of that space.
So for two years I was in
a pretty safe environment.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: If I had mingled
with highly educated people,
they would have found
out that something is not
right about this guy.
By the time I went to MetLife, I
also had three years of college
behind me.
So now I could manage.
You know, I could
manage to operate
on the false documents
pretending that I
was an American from birth.
>>REGINA: Right.
Let's talk about-- meanwhile,
you're having to go back.
You're being called back
to the Soviet Union.
>>BARSKY: Yes, every two years--
>>REGINA: Every two years.
>>BARSKY: --I went back.
>>REGINA: And you have
Gerlinde, who they allowed you
to have a relationship with.
>>BARSKY: Yes, that's--
>>REGINA: And you
have a son, Matthias.
>>BARSKY: Right.
I went back--
>>REGINA: You left
them behind, yeah.
>>BARSKY: I went
back for debriefing.
Additional training a
little bit, as time allowed.
And then spending some
time with my German family
every two years.
>>REGINA: Right.
So that was going on.
Meanwhile, you're now
developing an American life.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
And I'm developing two
distinct personalities
that really didn't interact
with each other very well.
The American was-- the moment
I came back to New York,
I was American again and I
forgot all about Germany.
And vise-versa.
>>REGINA: Right.
You brought a lot
of goods, however,
all the nice stuff
back to your girlfriend
or back to your friends.
>>BARSKY: That's right.
I bought clothes
at Bergdorf Goodman
and brought them
into East Germany.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
You were digging
the American life.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
People looking at
her as though, what?
Where does she get
that stuff from?
You couldn't even get
this in West Berlin.
>>REGINA: Right.
Well, at one point there
was an interesting moment
where your mother--
because you kept
disappearing and you
weren't really explaining that
well anything to your family.
You had to lie to them.
And she said, are you a spy?
>>BARSKY: That was that was
roughly when I joined the KGB
and when I changed back stories.
At first I stopped
my academic career
to become a member of the State
Department of East Germany.
>>REGINA: And your
mom's like, huh.
Something's up.
>>BARSKY: And then I went back
to research in Kazakhstan,
to join the space research
agency of the Soviet Union.
And at that point she
said, are you a spy?
And then my brother
came to my aid there
and he said, no, Albrecht
would not do that.
And so she calmed down.
She literally bought
into the cover stories--
>>REGINA: The stories
you were telling her.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
>>REGINA: So meanwhile you're--
were you married to
Gerlinde at this time?
>>BARSKY: I was, yes.
I was.
>>REGINA: So your
wife, she was fully
aware of what you were doing.
>>BARSKY: She was absolutely.
>>REGINA: And they
allowed it because she
was a good, steady mate.
And they also-- this is
an interesting thing,
because they normally didn't
want those attachments.
You write in the book,
the one perk to that
is because you loved
women, it might keep you
from getting too close to--
>>BARSKY: That's correct.
Yes.
>>REGINA: --any other women.
Because you were married.
>>BARSKY: She and the
son were an anchor
that would make me think twice
about possibly defecting.
>>REGINA: Right.
Because you'd have to
leave them behind forever.
>>BARSKY: Because there was
an understated stated threat
that something bad might
happen to them if I
betrayed the Soviet Union.
>>REGINA: And also, women
could work their way
in an intelligence, too.
>>BARSKY: That's incorrect.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>REGINA: You'd be uncovered.
So you're going back and
forth every two years.
Now you're back here.
You're working for MetLife.
And now you have another
relationship and another life
going on in the United States.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And I want to talk
about the psychological part
of how you began feeling
living on American soil,
living the American
life, working
for an American corporation.
>>BARSKY: Well, a year
or two into working
at MetLife I sort of--
there was a moment
when things started flipping.
First of all, the
insurance industry
was taught to us to be
one of the most evil parts
of capitalism.
Well, I didn't see much
evil within MetLife,
at least not the
part that I saw.
I mean, it was a very
paternalistic type company.
And I felt it almost
like back home.
You know, they took care of you.
They even fed you a free lunch.
I had a great job.
>>REGINA: You made friends.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
>>REGINA: Great friends.
>>BARSKY: And they
were good people.
And I had a great job.
And there came a moment when--
you know, as a
programmer, as an IT guy,
it's quite demanding--
there came a moment when
my spy stuff was in the
way of or interfering
with my other job.
And then-- I don't know
exactly when that happened,
but I was starting
to think about man,
one of those days I'm going
to have to leave this place
and go back.
And I'm going to miss it.
It wasn't enough for me to
say I'm going to stay here,
but you know, I became really--
I adjusted to the
American way of life,
and it sort of took
me over as something
that I really enjoyed and liked.
And would have, if I
could have, continued.
But of course, I
always was planning
to go back and reunite--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>REGINA: But what about
the philosophically?
I mean, ideologically.
Was that starting to
break down with it?
>>BARSKY: Somewhat.
I didn't really buy
into the capitalism
is all evil theology anymore.
I became-- not-knowing that
that theory actually existed,
I became an adherent to what
was called conversion theory.
>>REGINA: What's that mean?
>>BARSKY: A
conversion theory was
in the 70s something
that came out
of the socialist
parties in Europe.
The idea was that capitalism
and socialism will eventually
converge into a
socialistic kind of--
>>REGINA: Democratic socialism.
>>BARSKY: Something like that.
Yeah, exactly.
And that sounded pretty good.
And interestingly, there were
some folks within the KGB
who were--
>>REGINA: In support of that.
>>BARSKY: In support of that.
Correctly.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK, so this was already
happening in your own mind.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And now you have
also developed a relationship
with a woman over here.
Who you had children with.
>>BARSKY: Penelope.
She was an illegal
alien when I met her.
I didn't know it.
She was very safe
to have to have
an intimate relationship
with because she
came from another country.
She wouldn't have known whether
I was a true American or not.
She was very pretty.
And one day she confided in
me that she was in the country
illegally and she was looking
for somebody to get married to.
>>REGINA: You're in your
own precarious situation.
>>BARSKY: So there is my
damsel in distress syndrome
that popped up.
I said, OK.
Let me think about this.
And I did some investigation,
and I figured yeah,
I can pull this off.
So I applied for her and
she became a citizen.
The interview was
real easy because she
managed to get pregnant.
Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: So now we have a
second family brewing here.
>>BARSKY: I got married.
Here's a child coming.
And this childbirth
is still my child.
She is here.
Her name is Chelsea.
>>REGINA: Beautiful woman.
>>BARSKY: And she
changed my life.
>>REGINA: And so everything
was in sublime order.
However, the relationship
started deteriorating.
But now let me ask you this.
Now, people are wondering,
what did you do as a spy?
Sounds like you had a
pretty chilled life working
for MetLife.
What did you actually do?
I mean, did you have dead drops
that you were working with?
Were you trying to
get intelligence
on a corporate level back?
Or what?
>>BARSKY: Well, this was really
odd in that you, know since,
plan A didn't work, now--
>>REGINA: You're aren't
to go to the high way
without the passport.
>>BARSKY: Plan B
was, like, you know,
slowly work your
way up in society.
I wasn't positioned to get to
know the people that they would
have wanted me to get to know.
You know, one of the
targets was the Institute
for Foreign Relations
at Columbia University,
where Brzezinski actually
operated at the time.
I just didn't have
a good way of--
>>REGINA: You didn't
have the connections.
>>BARSKY: --winding up there.
Because I had a day job here.
And what is my reason
for being there?
So I expressed that to them,
and they sort of bought it
but kept on telling
me, make more contacts.
So while I was a
student, I learned,
I got to know a lot
of potential recruits.
Fellow students who pursued
one ideology or another.
We liked ideological recruits.
And so I profiled a few of them.
And what happened with them,
whether they were recruited
or not I don't know.
>>REGINA: You just
opened the door.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
There were situations
where they actually
used my ability to travel
around the country freely.
At one point I
believe they actually
wanted me to find a dead
drop somewhere way up
north in the northern
part of New England.
And I think it had something to
do with potentially retrieving
stuff that Aldrich Ames--
>>REGINA: Right.
That big, huge spy
scandal in the US.
>>BARSKY: --may have put there.
Because Ames had direct
contact with KGB,
which is really,
really dangerous.
If they had put
me in the middle,
it would have been much safer.
Never happened.
But also they just
really didn't quite
know what value
I could have had.
If they had listened to--
if they had understood
the value of data.
I had access to
the health records
of about 50 million Americans.
And a lot of them
were executives
of companies that,
you know, were
in the military
industrial complex.
I told them.
Didn't get--
>>REGINA: They didn't have
any curiosity toward that.
>>BARSKY: Didn't register.
Nope.
>>REGINA: Didn't see
how it would be useful.
>>BARSKY: No.
I'm happy to report that
I never personally handled
classified materials.
>>REGINA: The spy who
didn't get that far.
>>BARSKY: Thank you.
>>REGINA: So meanwhile,
you have this other family.
And you have your Chelsea, who
just split your heart open.
>>BARSKY: Yeah
>>REGINA: And so now
you're starting--
a day came finally
when you got--
I remember the book
starts that way.
There was a little red
dot that they left for you
in public transit area.
And it means come home.
>>BARSKY: That's right.
>>REGINA: You've been
bust-- you've been blown.
>>BARSKY: Right.
Pretty much.
>>REGINA: You get your passport,
get out of the country,
get home.
>>BARSKY: Just make a beeline
to the Canadian border.
I had some reserve documents
for a case like that.
They were hidden
someplace in a park.
>>REGINA: In Central Park?
>>BARSKY: No.
In a park in the Bronx.
>>REGINA: In the Bronx.
OK.
>>BARSKY: And you know,
just don't even go home.
Just--
>>REGINA: Get your stuff now.
Go.
>>BARSKY: Go.
And I didn't.
>>REGINA: Red alert.
>>BARSKY: And I didn't.
I wasn't ready.
So I went to work, instead.
This was on my way to work.
You know, that day I
didn't do much work.
I was just sitting,
staring on the screen.
Because I had tried to
figure out how to support
Chelsea, who was at
the time 18 months old.
And I was the first
time after Rosie
that I really loved somebody.
But it was a different love.
It was unconditional.
>>REGINA: Unconditional.
With all your heart.
>>BARSKY: All she gave
me back was a smile.
And just-- and at that point,
I had not found a solution.
I was afraid of
telling the KGB that I
had a child, because
they would have,
could have helped
support this child.
No good.
And I wasn't ready
to defect, either.
So now I'm playing for time.
I could have been sick.
I could have--
I just ignored that signal.
>>REGINA: And someone finally
approached you and said,
you need to come back.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
After about three weeks
of me playing dead,
they eventually
went to a drastic--
took a drastic measure
and have somebody
approach me directly
on a subway platform.
Where they knew I
would show up every day
when I'm going to work.
And he came--
I still remember like
it was yesterday.
He sidled up to me from
the right, a short guy
in a dark coat, and he
whispered, you gotta come back,
or else you're dead.
And then he walked away.
Now, they knew that I
knew that they know.
So everybody knew that
I had the message.
So from now, they
had forced my hand.
I had to do something.
Either go or find a way to stay.
And that's when I came up with
the most brilliant, probably--
>>REGINA: Unbelievably
brilliant.
>>BARSKY: Celestially
inspired lie.
>>REGINA: You just love it.
>>BARSKY: And I told them--
I resigned from the KGB with
a letter in secret writing
stating that I had
contracted AIDS
and I wouldn't,
couldn't come back.
I would be infecting others.
And I may have a chance to get
treated in the United States.
And they bought it.
>>REGINA: And they were
terrified of AIDS being--
>>BARSKY: Of course, they were.
>>REGINA: --introduced
to their country.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, absolutely.
>>REGINA: That was so genius.
I just laughed when I read that.
I thought, oh my god,
what a genius move.
You said they were
afraid of three things.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, I did.
>>REGINA: Tell us
what tell they were.
>>BARSKY: They were standouts.
They were afraid of AIDS.
They were afraid, deathly
afraid of Ronald Reagan.
Because we all knew that
this man was not quite sane,
and he had his hand
on the nuclear button.
And for some reason, and
this is a historic strain
in the Russian character--
Jews.
They wanted me to stay
away from the Jews.
In New York.
>>REGINA: In New York.
Yeah.
>>BARSKY: How do you do that?
>>REGINA: Well, that's
not going to happen.
So this-- so they had their
fears, their deeply embedded
fears.
You just hit the one
that you could that would
work fast and expeditiously.
And so they let--
they kind of cut you
loose, let you go.
Meanwhile, Gerlinde was
told you were dead, right?
>>BARSKY: Yes.
They told her--
>>REGINA: And she was paid off.
Because you hadn't
been collecting
any of the money
from the KGB, right?
You had been saving it.
>>BARSKY: No,
there were-- it was
a significant amount of money.
I forgot how much.
$50,000 or $60,000.
>>REGINA: I think in the
book it said $65,000.
>>BARSKY: Something like that.
Because, you know,
they paid me a salary
in dollars while
I was on my own.
I didn't need the money.
>>REGINA: Because you had a job.
>>BARSKY: It added up.
They also paid my rent.
So that, I didn't need.
It added up.
So, you know.
And I got a $10,000 award that
went with the second highest
decoration of the
Soviet Union, which I
got one year before I retired.
So yeah.
They gave her some of the money.
I never found out how much.
But she received a
significant amount of money.
And she was told that--
>>REGINA: You were dead.
>>BARSKY: --I died.
Died from AIDS.
>>REGINA: So that's
all tidied up.
You guys weren't getting along
well at that time, anyway.
You didn't see each other
enough to even bond,
really, in those later years.
>>BARSKY: The last
visit was pretty bad.
She exploded in my face.
And she still loved me, but
she says, you got to stop this.
You know, you gotta come back.
You know, I'm over
here by myself.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
She spent all the time
alone with Matthias.
>>BARSKY: With Matthias.
And this was not beyond repair.
But we hadn't grown together.
We had grown apart.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you spent
all your time apart except
for a little visit--
>>BARSKY: 10 years of no.
Yes, right.
>>REGINA: --every two years.
>>BARSKY: And, you
know-- and spending--
>>REGINA: 10 years.
>>BARSKY: Those years were
spent in places that were not
accessible to ordinary Germans.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And you can bring so many
pearls and pretty things,
but that's not going to do it.
>>BARSKY: No.
And we had people
that catered to us.
Cooks and cleaning personnel.
>>REGINA: But that's not enough.
She had no
relationship with you.
>>BARSKY: Nope.
>>REGINA: So that was done.
And now you go on and you
continue, and you think,
I'm home free.
>>BARSKY: Home free.
>>REGINA: Home free.
Little did you know there
was another person who was--
was he a Soviet living
here who was going
through some archival stuff?
>>BARSKY: No.
There was an archivist
at KGB headquarters--
>>REGINA: KGB headquarters, OK.
>>BARSKY: --who had become
disillusioned with the Soviet
Union and had a deep,
deep, deep hatred
in himself for the
system because his son
had some kind of a disease that
could not be treated in Russia.
>>REGINA: And they
wouldn't let him go.
>>BARSKY: He applied to
let him go to England,
and it was denied.
And so his only way of getting
back at them with revenge
was to--
>>REGINA: Blow the cover
of people like you.
>>BARSKY: --to copy tons and
tons of material over time
and collect it and
eventually show up
at the doors of the
British embassy.
And connect with MI6, the
British espionage agency.
And they smuggled him
out of the country.
And according to reports, he
had like several cases of paper
with him.
It was the biggest intelligence
find in all of history.
And I was part of it.
>>REGINA: There you were.
Jack Barsky is embedded there.
>>BARSKY: That's right.
>>REGINA: So now you come
on the radar of the FBI.
>>BARSKY: Right.
>>REGINA: And now this is
kind of like "The Americans."
I mean, members of your
team move in next to you.
>>BARSKY: They did.
>>REGINA: You know,
they're spying.
Your house is
bugged, you're being
watched through binoculars.
I mean you're
bugged to the hilt.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You haven't a clue.
You're a spy who hasn't
a clue that you're
being totally bugged because
you thought you were home free.
>>BARSKY: Because I had
long since given up checking
on myself.
I had long since--
had stopped putting
markers in my house
to see whether somebody
had looked at my stuff.
No.
I was home free.
>>REGINA: Home free.
Had a new family, had a good
job, you were an American.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
So this spying on you went on
for quite a while, I assume.
>>BARSKY: For two-plus years.
They were very, very careful
because the only thing
that they really know about me,
that I was an embedded sleeper.
They had no idea whether
I was still active.
And if I had still been active,
I would have found out--
if they weren't really careful,
I would have found out.
So they just wanted to
find out, what is he doing
or what is he not doing?
And after two
years, I eventually
provided them with a confession.
>>REGINA: You wrapped
it up in a bow
because you were
confessing to your wife.
Because she's like that, eh.
>>BARSKY: The house was
bugged, and I told her--
>>REGINA: The whole story.
>>BARSKY: --the whole story.
And they had it on tape.
>>REGINA: It was wrapped
up in a bow for them.
And they're like, yeah, got you.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So then the sting
where you're apprehended.
>>BARSKY: Yeah,
I was apprehended
where they simulated
a routine traffic stop
as I'm crossing the Delaware.
And then there's
this tall bridge.
And as I'm getting through,
I'm being waved to the side
by a state trooper.
They invented a state
trooper, actually.
The guy wasn't FBI.
They just asked the state police
if they could use somebody.
And then he said, well, this
is a routine traffic stop.
Could you please step
out of the vehicle?
Which was already
a little bit odd.
And then I see from
my peripheral vision
from the right--
again, from the right--
somebody is coming up.
And before I could even think
what's going on, the fellow
comes close and he flips open
something like a wallet or a --
And I didn't have to look at it.
And I didn't have to
hear what he said.
>>REGINA: You knew.
>>BARSKY: He said, the FBI
would like to talk to you.
I already knew something not
very good was going to happen.
And according to
Joe Riley, who was
the agent who approached
me, who is now
a good friend of mine and the--
>>REGINA: That's the
beautiful part of the story.
>>BARSKY: --godfather
of my last child.
According to Joe, I
went white as a sheet.
[WHISTLES] All
blood disappeared.
>>REGINA: No kidding.
Your life's over.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
All of a sudden, it's like--
>>REGINA: You're
going to be in prison.
>>BARSKY: Like a dam broke,
the waters of my past
came rushing in and
pretty much devoured me.
And then things sort of eased.
The waters became
still and quiet.
Because the first question I
asked them, am I under arrest?
When they told me to
get in the car and we
were driving someplace north.
And they said, no.
Oh.
Just a little speck of
light there on the horizon.
And then Joe turns around--
he was in the passenger
seat-- he turns around.
Hey Jack, this may not be
the worst day of your life.
Oh, there's a glimmer of hope.
So you know, we spent a couple
of hours of them interrogating
me, and then they let me go.
Let me go back home.
Not without a warning.
They had a big team.
It was a massive event there.
They had people at every
intersection surrounding
my house.
And I was told, listen,
if you think of running--
>>REGINA: No, this was
like in the movies.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
We we'll catch you.
>>REGINA: You were surrounded.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
I had no reason to run, but
they didn't know that yet.
>>REGINA: So why did
he let you go home?
>>BARSKY: Because
they were interested
in my full cooperation.
And so they were treating
me with civility.
It was always very polite.
>>REGINA: No water-boarding.
>>BARSKY: Very respectful.
I did have to pass
a lie detector test.
But it was all
very collaborative.
>>REGINA: And by this time,
you're really an American,
more or less.
>>BARSKY: I had no reason to
protect anything or anybody.
First of all, I didn't
know enough details
to give anybody else up.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: Which--
>>REGINA: You were operating
on your own and an American,
so you didn't have a lot.
>>BARSKY: And with regard to--
you know, I had no allegiance
to the Soviet Union.
And by that time, I
had learned enough
about what an evil state
East Germany had been,
so I had no allegiance
to that entity anymore.
So I was gladly cooperating.
>>REGINA: And I mean, I
love this part of the story.
Because to be an FBI
agent and undercover
took some of the same
kind of personality traits
that you had.
You could understand
each other in a way.
Almost as, in a way,
a kind of brotherhood
of people who have lived this
kind of isolated and dangerous
life.
And you understood each other.
>>BARSKY: FBI understands
people like me theoretically.
CIA understands people
like me instinctively.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And I've met
some ex-CIA people,
and we can finish each
other's sentences.
>>REGINA: Yeah, because
that's the same mindset.
>>BARSKY: Same mindset.
>>REGINA: But it was enough
that he saw the humanity in you.
And in fact, he writes this
beautiful thing about you
at the end of your book.
That's why I encourage
everyone to read the book.
To me, it really,
it made me cry.
It did make me cry a
few times in the book.
And he became a good
friend, as you say.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
We've played a lot of golf.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: You play golf still.
And that's the beautiful
end to that story.
It wasn't the worst
day of your life.
>>BARSKY: Nope.
>>REGINA: It might have
been one of the best.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
I'm glad they caught me.
My life made yet another turn,
and it was for the better.
It became very interesting.
>>REGINA: Now we're
going to take--
we're going to swap out Chelsea.
We'll have her sit in your
chair for a few minutes.
Because she was 19
when she found out
her wonderful American
daddy was a Soviet spy.
And then we're going
to come back to you.
And I want to talk to you
about some modern day events.
>>BARSKY: OK.
>>REGINA: You know,
the psyche of Russia.
And the mindsets that we're
all dealing with right now.
Because everyone is so confused.
And that ideology you
talked about at the top
of the last show.
OK?
So thank you, Jack.
>>BARSKY: OK.
>>REGINA: OK.
We'll see Chelsea now.
Welcome Chelsea.
You're absolutely beautiful.
>>CHELSEA DITTRICH: Thank you.
>>REGINA: And you dad told us
all those are your real eyes.
>>DITTRICH: Yes.
>>REGINA: You haven't
had an eye transplant.
Those big, beautiful eyes.
Let's just get right down to
it, because we have so much
to do in so little time.
So when your dad was
busted and he was taken in,
then he was able
to share with you,
reveal his true identity to you.
You were 19 years old.
You're a very smart woman, and
you were a smart young woman
then.
What were your
reactions, first of all,
to know that your dad had
a totally separate life you
hadn't known about?
>>DITTRICH: Mostly curiosity.
I wouldn't say that I was angry.
I've never felt anger
over any of this.
It's mostly, OK, now things
are starting to make sense.
>>REGINA: What was making sense?
What was out of place before
that this cleared up for you?
>>DITTRICH: The house we
lived in Pennsylvania.
It was rural Pennsylvania.
And upper Mount Bethel, it
was just a very rural town.
Our house was nestled
on four acres,
and we had neighbors that
were like a quarter mile away.
Every house was like a quarter
mile away, half a mile away.
But our neighbors
right next door.
I never saw clothes
on the clothesline.
The grass was always cut.
The curtains were always shut.
I've never seen anyone go
in and out of the house
except for one time.
I just always had this
strange feeling about things.
And some things
just didn't add up.
Asking my dad about his past,
he didn't really have a story.
As holding up pictures
of your family,
I had no pictures
of my grandparents.
I didn't even have
the right information
because he gave me
a different story.
It was a cover story.
And things just
didn't make sense,
and I didn't have
enough information.
And for me information is power.
>>REGINA: Well,
and you were also
kind of a devotee of history.
You loved watching shows
on the History Channel
and reading books about history.
And you were
interested in Germany,
in World War II,
and all of this.
And so your life,
little did you know,
had a direct connection
to all of that.
And so there are a couple
of different things.
But one is, because
you had that interest
and now you realize
your dad is German.
Albrecht Dittrich.
Interestingly, you changed your
last name to Dittrich, right?
>>DITTRICH: Yes, I did.
>>REGINA: So you're
now Chelsea Dittrich.
>>DITTRICH: Yeah, there
was a reason for that.
I had a documentary out
on A&E that aired in 2018.
And just before that,
I realized that when
I learned about the family
of the original Jack Barsky,
they already knew
about all of this,
it kind of hit my
heartstrings a little bit.
And I knew that if
I would go public
with my part of
the story that it
might bring up some old wounds.
>>REGINA: You wouldn't
carry that name.
>>DITTRICH: And I didn't
want to carry that name.
Really and truly,
if everything was
under the right circumstances,
I would have had that last name.
So out of respect
for the family,
and the real Jack
Barsky, that's why I
wanted to change my last name.
>>REGINA: That was very
sensitive of you to do.
And so now back to the house.
So now you know.
It's starting to
answer some questions.
Now, the house that had
no laundry and so forth,
was that where Joe
Riley was living?
>>DITTRICH: Yeah.
That was the house that
they planted two FBI agents.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I've seen that.
And so it's like, hmm, OK.
>>DITTRICH: That's crazy.
I mean, they went through
our trash every Wednesday
and they returned it before
the garbage man came.
>>REGINA: They had
cameras everywhere.
>>DITTRICH: These are
things that were--
cameras all over the house.
Microphones all over the house.
These are things that you
don't realize the FBI does.
And I learned about
this happening
when I was in my early 20s.
So my dad told me when I was 19.
But a few years later was
when I found out about the FBI
buying the house next door.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Big story.
>>DITTRICH: Yeah, the whole--
all the details.
And I was like, this
is unbelievable.
You're--
>>REGINA: It's like
out of a movie.
>>DITTRICH: Yes.
But you know, my
world view on privacy
is completely different.
Like, I don't expect
privacy in my life.
>>REGINA: Yeah, not anymore.
Now, your mother didn't handle
the news as well as you did.
>>DITTRICH: No.
No, she did not.
>>REGINA: And that was
kind of the end of--
>>DITTRICH: but my mother also
found out long before I knew.
And she had to keep her mind and
her mouth shut for a long time.
Because they weren't
able to be open
and to be able to talk about it.
So no, she didn't
handle it very well.
And as a matter of
>>REGINA: Fact-- Because
it's destabilized her future.
>>DITTRICH: Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
And it's caused a lot of tension
between me and her having
a mother-daughter relationship.
And that's something
we're working on now.
But yeah, she definitely
did not handle that well.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And they're apart now.
And he's been
remarried since then.
And your family continues
to grow, your step siblings
and so forth.
Now really-- so
let's just go back.
Now, you'd studied
this era of history.
Now you find out your dad is
part of that era of history.
How did--
Because you're a person
of curiosity and intrigue
and want to know, how did
that affect your relationship
with your dad on a
bonding level, even?
>>DITTRICH: I think
we became closer.
I think you become
closer in general
with anyone when they reveal
their true selves to you.
And even though it
took my dad two decades
of my life to get
to that point, I
think it became a thing that
drew us closer because I
understood him better.
I understood his
reasons, his why.
I understood how lucky I was,
how fortunate and blessed I
am that everything turned
out the way it did.
Because it could
have been much worse.
>>REGINA: It could
And the fact is you the reason
your dad made this move,
anyway, for the most part.
I mean, you really were
central to the whole story.
Because of his
unconditional love for you,
which he had never experienced.
>>DITTRICH: Yeah.
And I feel very honored that
he credits me with that,
because I was so young I
wouldn't understand that.
>>REGINA: No, you
wouldn't understand it.
Now, a big thing happened.
You insisted that your father
bring Matthias, your older
brother from Germany, from
the marriage of Gerlinde,
back into his life
and your life.
>>DITTRICH: Yeah.
So rewind.
So we were-- my parents
were starting to go
through the divorce process.
And my dad moved out
to be closer to work.
I visited him.
We're watching a basketball
game on the couch.
It's like, I played basketball
in college, that was our thing.
>>REGINA: You and your
dad are both very tall.
>>DITTRICH: Yes.
So we're watching
a basketball game,
and my dad doesn't even
look me in the eye.
He's Looking at the
TV, and he says,
did I tell you that you
have another brother?
I was just like, what?
That's unbelievable.
And I was confused.
I thought he was talking
about my younger brother.
But he quickly told
me, no, no, no.
You have an older
brother in Germany.
His name is Matthias.
And I just asked him
for more information.
Like where was he born?
What's his birthday?
What does he look like?
What's his mom's name?
I wanted to know because
my initial intent was,
I'm going to find him.
And he wanted nothing
to do with that.
He wanted absolutely
nothing to do with that.
>>REGINA: But your
dad knows you're going
to do what you want to do.
>>DITTRICH: Absolutely.
I've been doing that
since I was young.
>>REGINA: You was born.
>>DITTRICH: Yeah.
So he knew that I would
definitely go after him
and try to find him.
He didn't think I was
going to be successful.
It took me a year and a
half, but I found him.
>>REGINA: And?
>>DITTRICH: And I sent my
dad a quick little email note
saying, hey, guess what?
I found Matthias, here's a
link to his CV on the Free
University of Berlin's
website, and there's a picture,
and that's definitely him.
And I've been in
contact with him
and he's going to come
to the US to meet me.
And the answer that I got
from my dad was, now what?
I think he was terrified.
>>REGINA: I'm sure he was.
And Matthias wasn't all that
hot on meeting your dad.
He wanted to meet you.
>>DITTRICH: Yeah.
He just wanted to
come to the US.
And he was very adamant,
stating that you know,
I don't want to worry
about meeting him.
I just want to meet you.
I have very little time.
I'm finishing up my PhD.
I just want to meet
you, you're my sister.
You know, it was
a surprise to him.
He didn't know he had a sister.
He had no idea.
>>REGINA: So ultimately,
it was chilly.
A little frosty to begin with.
>>DITTRICH: Yes.
>>REGINA: Your dad did
come into the picture.
>>DITTRICH: Yes.
So Matthias came to visit.
It was the second
morning that I woke up,
and Matthias was
staring at me sleeping.
And I wasn't, like,
bothered by that.
I knew.
I mean, I felt the same way.
I was just like, can't
believe this guy is here.
This is my brother.
But he said-- when I woke up,
he said, I want to meet him.
But you have to be there.
And I said, are you sure?
So I called him, tell my dad.
And I say, hey, can you meet us
for dinner at the Clinton House
maybe tonight or tomorrow night?
And he hung up the phone on me.
And he calls me back
10 minutes later,
and he says 8PM at
the Clinton House.
And then Matthias and I were
quiet for the rest of the day
because we were nervous.
>>REGINA: And though it wasn't,
you know, warm and huggy
and everything,
ultimately the two men
found their way back together
over a period of time.
And now there are
four children, right?
>>DITTRICH: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: All told.
And as a family, you've
come to support your father.
Your father supports you.
Gerlinde wasn't particularly
happy to know that he was alive
and not dead.
I think that was kind of not
a pleasant surprise for her.
>>DITTRICH: No.
I mean, for everyone there
are surprises in this story.
>>REGINA: There was, yeah.
>>DITTRICH: So, I mean--
>>REGINA: It just kept
getting more interesting.
>>DITTRICH: Absolutely, yes.
>>REGINA: And so because we
have to bring your dad back on
and talk to him about
some more things.
And I'm thinking god, we
need yet another hour.
Just tell me, to
you, what this has
done in terms of influencing
and strengthening your life.
>>DITTRICH: I'm a lot
more open in my life.
And my curiosity has always
played a part in general,
but it's, I seek to understand
before anything else.
So this has actually
opened up, you know,
more into my relationships
with my family.
Even though, you
know, we've come
to an understanding
in the family,
there's still this
elephant in the room.
There's still some
things that we're
going to sweep under the
rug and not talk about.
And that's OK.
And we all get that.
But we're all here now.
And I'm very happy about that.
There are things like
pictures of my grandparents
that I never would have had if
I wasn't able to find Matthias.
In addition to that,
there's another brother
that I found out about later.
But at that time, my
dad helped me find him.
And it wasn't just me.
So there is a lot
more to this story.
But what this has
done from my life
and for the family is just
we now all have each other.
>>REGINA: Which is beautiful.
And it really is down
to you because you
had a very curious mind and
a very courageous heart.
And those are ultimately
things that your dad developed
in himself over time, too.
>>DITTRICH: Yeah, there's
a big change in everyone.
There's a great
change in my dad.
There's this-- my dad
carried around a lot of guilt
for the majority of his life.
A lot of repressed emotions.
And I have watched him
transform into what he is now.
And now he's actually able to be
honest and open and a lot more
free, which has also affected
everybody else in the family.
The rest of us can
do the same thing.
So that's a really big blessing.
>>REGINA: So it is a love story.
He said that on the phone
with me a couple weeks ago.
He said, this is
really a love story.
>>DITTRICH: Is is.
>>REGINA: And so you're
the product of that.
And you're just a shining light.
And I'm so happy you
were able to have
both the curiosity and the
will to put your family back
together.
>>DITTRICH: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Thank you
so much, Chelsea.
>>DITTRICH: Thank you.
>>REGINA: And now we're going to
go back and talk with your dad
about current events of the day.
Because we're all
confused here in America
and don't understand
what's going on here.
And we don't understand
what's going on in Russia.
And we don't understand the
relationship between the two.
So we're going to
go back to your dad.
Thanks again, Chelsea.
>>DITTRICH: Thank you, Regina.
>>REGINA: OK.
We're back with Jack,
or Dieter, or Albrecht.
>>BARSKY: Whatever.
Or William Dyson.
>>REGINA: William Dyson.
We're back.
Your daughter's just so
articulate and beautiful.
>>BARSKY: I'm proud of her.
>>REGINA: It was wonderful.
Yeah, you should be.
So one of the things I
wanted to talk about but not
take a lot of time on
is "The Americans."
Because a lot of America was
intrigued with this show.
And I first heard about it
on PBS with the producers.
How much of that
show about these two
embedded Russian spies had truth
in it versus was pure fiction
and entertainment?
>>BARSKY: All right.
Let's start with the truth.
What the producers of
that show do very well
and what they got
right is the psychology
of living a double life.
The stress that comes with it.
But everything else is fiction.
It's great entertainment.
But if you were to film a
day in my life as an illegal,
everybody would go to sleep.
So what they--
>>REGINA: Well, they
were out murdering
at night, and so forth.
>>BARSKY: They were
murdering at night,
and then they had a day job.
And then this guy was
married to another woman
in the same space.
And they were
meeting their handler
on the territory of
the United States.
That was a documented no-no.
This would never happen.
Illegals did not meet their
handlers in the United States.
>>REGINA: OK.
So that's put to rest.
But some of the spy
craft, the basic things
about getting the
tapes and decryption.
And the basic nuts
and bolts of it had--
>>BARSKY: Well, even--
>>REGINA: --some truth, right?
>>BARSKY: No, not really.
Even you know, when they
listen to the radio,
they got their stuff
through numbers.
Number stations, they're called.
Their code was spoken.
1-5-6-8.
I got Morse code.
There's a good reason for that.
I don't want to get into detail.
All of this was
dramatically enhanced.
Let's put it this way.
Some of it was taken
out of the truth,
but nothing really I could
say was absolutely real.
>>REGINA: Well,
maybe the only thing
in common with your life in that
is you both got called home.
You didn't go, they did.
>>BARSKY: Right.
And the best part of it was the
one scene where I was an extra.
>>REGINA: Yes.
What episode was that?
>>BARSKY: 5-11.
>>REGINA: Five.
Season five, number 11.
Go look for Jack if anyone
wants to watch the series.
OK.
So I want to get on to what's
going on in modern times.
We talked about it at the top.
And you said--
because I've never
seen this amount of confusion,
distraction, disinformation.
The media is churning
it out over time.
But also social media
platforms, which I am positive
I've identified a couple that
are actually Russian-backed.
And so you said the
sadness of this time
is we've now been split
in America into two
ideological camps.
>>BARSKY: Fundamentally.
>>REGINA: And can you explain
that from your point of view
to us?
>>BARSKY: Well,
you see, what I see
here is that we totally forgot
what we have in common as
opposed to what we don't have
in common with other societies.
Other countries with countries
like Russia and China
and so forth.
We're being threatened
from the outside world.
And what we're doing
is we're helping.
We're helping actually
increase that threat
by not being united.
And what the Russians
are doing now,
they've been doing throughout
the existence of the KGB,
which is called disinformation.
And sowing discord within
democracies such as ours.
They're not just doing it here.
They're doing it in
Europe and they're
doing it in other places.
>>REGINA: How high does it go?
To what levels?
In terms of infiltrating
media and so forth.
>>BARSKY: I think it
comes from the very top.
In the days of the KGB,
when Andropov took over,
he made what's called
active measures.
That's what this is
called in the business.
He made this a priority.
>>REGINA: To embed
in the US media.
>>BARSKY: To plant falsehoods.
>>REGINA: Plant
false information.
>>BARSKY: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Through the media.
>>BARSKY: And they used
to do it, you know,
in the print media
and maybe the radio.
But now by the internet,
it is so much easier.
And unfortunately,
it is very difficult
even for well-informed
people to know
the truth, truth from fiction.
It takes a lot of research
and a lot of background
to at least have an instinctive
understanding that can be true.
Most Americans don't
have that tool set.
So there is a lot
of naive believers
in all kinds of stories.
>>REGINA: Oh, my god.
It's crazy.
>>BARSKY: And then
they get propagated
through our social media.
And nobody knows what anymore.
>>REGINA: They don't.
I mean, my friends,
the biggest--
and they're intelligent,
they have degrees.
I don't know what's true anymore
is the most common statement.
And you have these social
media platforms and these blogs
and vlogs and so forth that
are diametrically opposed
to information that get
people all hopped up to--
especially the conspiracy sites.
Because the one thing is
the arrogance of feeling
you're in the know when
other people aren't.
>>BARSKY: True.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: And it's appealing
to that vanity in Americans
who want to be special
and feel in the know.
And you can feed us anything.
>>BARSKY: And here's
the long-term problem.
With that kind of a mindset,
eventually the country
itself could be subject
to the manipulation
to a real dictator.
This could happen in
this country because--
>>REGINA: I see that.
>>BARSKY: --we are rudderless.
We are floating
out in the ocean,
and we don't even know what's
going on and where we're going.
>>REGINA: At the same
time, you know, we're
looking at situations in our
country where a lot of people
feel we're now vulnerable
to the Russians.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
Let me answer that question.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm looking at.
>>BARSKY: And I think
we are paying way
too much attention to Russia.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>BARSKY: There's a list that
I just came across that lists
people by wealth--
not people.
Countries.
Russia is number 15
with just about 1%
of the wealth of
the entire Earth.
The United States is number
one with close to 30%.
Now--
>>REGINA: China has to be--
>>BARSKY: --China's number two.
>>REGINA: Two.
Yeah.
>>BARSKY: So we need to
pay attention to China.
China is-- China is
much better organized.
Has a much better
long-term plan.
It is not dependent
upon just one person.
You don't know what
happened-- what's
going to happen past Putin.
And if you look at people
like the FBI and the CIA,
they will tell you
the same thing--
China is a bigger
threat than Russia.
The one reason you need to play
nice with Russia, in some way,
is because they have half the
nuclear arms on the planet.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>REGINA: OK.
And what about just the
interference to help
break down our own
society and have
us fighting with each other.
How can we-- this will
be my final question.
How can we as more
naive Americans
begin to discern when
we're being played?
I mean, because you
said a lot of people
don't have these basic
emotional, spiritual filters
that say hey, this doesn't
feel right, I'm not buying it.
We're being-- our minds are
being clouded and confused.
What would be the first
thing you'd tell us.
>>BARSKY: This is
so complicated.
If I were a dictator
in the US, I
would make everybody take
another history course
as a requirement for
keeping your job.
I mean, we don't really--
American history.
Americans think history,
anything past three months old
is already, we don't need
to pay attention to that.
And that, you know--
there's a famous
statement, and I forgot
who came up with that one.
But if you ignore history,
you are liable to repeat it.
>>REGINA: To repeat it.
>>BARSKY: And that,
in our day and age,
that is the end of the world.
Because World War
3 will destroy us.
>>REGINA: So history lesson.
And also, taking
some of the blinders
off to not always buy the
most salacious, the thing that
is most ego-gratifying,
and to look
at the hardcore nuts and bolts
of what's really going on.
Who's saying what?
Who's being pitted against whom?
How does that feel?
I mean, to me, I watch
who is standing up
and what I consider to be a
genuinely ethical or moral way.
That matters to me a lot.
If the entire
country, if all of us
started thinking in that
way, examining in that way,
even if we are being
lied to, and just started
feeling our way through it
on a psycho-spiritual level,
I think we could find our way
to some better decision making.
>>BARSKY: I agree with you.
And the other thing
is to just, like,
actually engage in
a dialogue and not
operate in a circle of
people who think like you.
>>REGINA: Echo
chambers, they call it.
>>BARSKY: The old
echo chamber, right.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Talk with others who
think the opposite.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
And keep an open mind.
Not everything
that you believe--
and that happens to me
fundamentally on a daily basis.
My wife will point
out some things
that I think to be the truth
that they're not the truth.
Be willing to accept that
whatever you believe in
may not be 100% truth.
>>REGINA: Yes.
A little humility would
go a long way in all of us
that are so attached to
our sides of the story.
>>BARSKY: That's right.
>>REGINA: And start
talking to others.
I've started doing
that with friends
who are across the other side in
their beliefs on these things.
And just seeing where we're--
and my whole goal
is to see where
we have something in common,
what we all are hoping for.
Just coming at it
through different lenses.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
You know what we have in common?
We all pretty much
want to be good people
and very often don't know
exactly what that means
and how to implement
this in practice.
And so you wind
up like me, who, I
thought I was a
good person, doing
a lot of bad things
for a long time.
>>REGINA: On that,
we'll say goodbye.
Jack, thank you so much.
Thank you for coming forward.
Thank you for-- I'm
glad you were busted.
And that puts you here today.
And also your daughter
for coming with you.
And I think this is going to
be very interesting to people
to look inside a completely
different way of living,
thinking, and becoming who
you ultimately are today.
Thank you.
>>BARSKY: Thanks for your
great, insightful questions.
>>REGINA: I hope you
enjoyed these conversations
as much as I have.
And I urge you to pick up
a copy of "Deep Undercover"
to learn more nuance
of this story.
And also to see the afterword
from FBI Agent Joe Riley.
It's beautiful.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]